I am with Mr. Roy Bliler, class of 1950. My name is
John Hatch. I'm a member of Dr. Anderson's History
347 class.
Mr. Bliler, I think if we could start off with, I'm
going to ask you some questions. It should be able
to pick you up. Could you please state your name and
your rank when you first entered the Army Air
Corps? Well, I went, to give you a little
background, I was a National Guardsman. And I went
with the 200 and, hell, I can't remember the number
of it now, but it was a post artillery antiaircraft
in 1941 as a sergeant. And then on January, on New
Year's Eve day, I got orders to report to the Air
Force at Williams Air Force Base. I had applied for
transfer to the Air Force at that time. So it was
January 1st, 1941, and I was a buck sergeant. What
was your full name? Roy Casson Lyler.
K-A-S-S-O-N. All right. And what was your rank
again? You were a? Sergeant, grade four. Okay.
Okay. And then what was your rank when you finally
retired? First lieutenant. First lieutenant.
Okay. Now, how old were you when you were first
commissioned? And how did you go, where did you go
for your commissioning? Well, I was commissioned
in the Air Force as a bombardier. And it was the 19th
day of December, 1941. I was commissioned. Did I
answer your question? Yes. All right. Okay.
Again, how old were you at this time? 1919 to 1941. I
was 22. Okay, 22. And now, in reference, how old
were some of the men that you served with at the
time? Well, they ran from, I think the youngest was
19. They were commissioning them at 18 in those
days, but most of them who were second lieutenants
were 19 to 25. And how about some of the enlisted?
What were their age groups? You know, I can't
really honestly tell you. They were young.
Probably 20 to 25. Okay. Now, Do you, for all you
know, are you the last Aggie survivor of the
Aleutians? I don't know. I haven't had contact
with any of them for years. I don't know. I just
don't know. I would hope that this could put me in
touch with some of them. Okay. Now, you mentioned
that you did not attend Texas A&M at first. You came
back after the war. No. Okay. Could you explain
that just a little bit? Well, I went to a little old
teacher's college in Minnesota in 1940, 41, 39,
40. And I was, it was, there was nothing to study for
but to be a teacher, and I wanted to be an engineer,
but that was hopeless at the time because I
couldn't afford it. I lived at home and went to
school. What was the question again? I came to the
U.N. right after the war in 1945, and enrolled as a
chemical engineer. And some of those credits
counted. I got about a year's credit. I had two
years of college. I got about a year's credit out of
that teacher's college for my degree. Okay. Now,
would you state, basically in your own words, what
the United States military's purpose was in the
Aleutian Island campaign? Well, it was to drive
the Japanese out of the Aleutian Islands. You see,
the Aleutian Islands were owned by the United
States. They were purchased in the original
Seward purchase years ago. And the Japanese
invaded the Aleutian Islands, and they invaded
two islands. And our objective was to get them the
hell out of there before they came on down the west
coast. They were a little afraid that they would
come down the west coast. It turned out later they
had no intention of it. It was diversionary, but we
didn't know that at the time. I guess that answers
your question. We wanted to get them the hell out of
there. All right. Could you kind of explain where
the Aleutian Islands are located? You mentioned
it's on the west coast. Well, it's off the west
coast of Alaska.
Matt? Be prepared,
my buddy. This is Alaska. Here we are. All right.
Now they start here and then they come on. They
string on out. Yes, sir. Into the Bering Sea. Okay.
And that's colder than hell up there. The water's
cold, even in the summertime. But these are the
islands, and I was on
Jetson-Kiscon Attitudes up here. And I ended up on
this island right here. If she was out, okay.
Ms. Andrea Hollins was a part of the chain, the
illusion chain. Jessica and Chick Holland, that
right there, that's the one I ended up on. I made a
few raids out of Adak Holland, but that was too far
back. So we moved up to Farming. They put up landing
strip on Amchitka Island. And we loaded onto
there. And we went there. They told us, it's in the
book, by the way, they told us that we would be just
an overnight stay. We went from this island here to
go out and raid Kiska. And we would have come back
and land and spend the night there. There was no
runway there. They told us it would be just
overnight, and we spent three months there. Okay.
They lied to us. They didn't want to get us in
trouble. They, you mean the brass? Yeah. I was in
the B-25, which was a twin-engine bomber. It was
called, nicknamed the Billy Mitchell, because
Billy Mitchell was a famous general in the World
Air Force before the war. He died before the war, I
think. But he had a big hand in the development of
the B-25. Wonderful airplane. Brought me back
many times. Can you kind of go into more detail
about your mission and your responsibility? You
said you were a bombardier. Bombardier. I dropped
bombs from up there. Hell from heaven boys, they
called us. And we never hit anything, it seemed
like. We used to come down and the colonel would get
us together and he'd cheer out the bombardier
because he was partial to the pilots. And one of the
bombardiers told him, he said, well, colonel, how
can we hit anything if we don't have a stable
platform? He says, the pilots keep moving on. He
says, that's your problem.
In reading the article, one thing that interested
me was the, you mentioned something about not all
the planes hit the site, the bombardier site.
Yeah. Could you kind of explain the site? Well,
usually they'd have a lead plane go up, and he'd
drop bombs, and he'd drop them just a little bit
short of the turret so that the planes that were
with him, you know, in formation, their bombs
would go off and hit the turret. Once in a while, we
hit it lucky.
We just had too much unstable weather and too many
unstable pilots. Of course, if I'd have been a
pilot, I'd have probably been unstable, too. How
often did you go on combat missions? I think I'm
listed 23 missions.
23 of them, I think. Now, that's official
missions. Now, those that we avoided, you know,
you'd get up and then you'd run into some weather
and you couldn't get there and you'd wander around
and hope to hell you'd find the island again, come
back and land. That wasn't a mission because you
didn't drop your bombs. Okay. So how did that work
out for a week, basically? 23 missions in six
months. So, in other words, you didn't see active
combat every day, I guess? Oh, no. No. A lot of
active weather, but not a lot of active combat.
Speaking of weather, I noticed in your article you
mentioned something about some very powerful
windstorms. What are they called? Could you
explain that a little bit? Well, it was a freak wind
that happened all the time up there. But it would
come up, we'd get up in the morning and we'd have a
still ocean. It was just perfectly calm. And all of
a sudden the clouds would just come from nowhere.
And then the wind would start to blow. And the
worldwide wind would get up as much as 300 miles an
hour. And it blew a lot of the boys out to sea and they
never recovered because the planes would only go
200 miles an hour. If they turned into this wind and
tried to get back, they flew backwards. Now, I
didn't put that in there. I sure didn't, I guess.
That's one of the things I didn't mention. Well,
how did they keep everything tied down in those
kind of winds? Well, they had what they called
revetments. They'd come in with a bulldozer, and
that shell was kind of peculiar. They'd have some
gravel sometimes, and they'd find that, and
they'd build revetments. which would be a good
open space with a wall. And they'd put the planes in
there, taxi them in there, and we walk them in, and
then tie them down. And then if the wind hit, it
would flop them around, but it wouldn't blow them
away because they were tied down. Okay. Now how
about, okay. It's back to your combinations. Were
you ever wounded in any of the times that you were?
One time, and I mentioned it in there, I don't know
whether they called it a wound or not. The flight
surgeon didn't call it a wound. The windshield,
something hit the windshield and shattered it,
and a piece of glass, I think, hit my finger. I still
got my scar from it. It wasn't much of a wound, but
it, well, here it is. But it bled like a stud hog. It
just bled all over the place. But I went back to him.
We landed, and I went to the flight surgeon. He put
some alcohol on it, and he said, hell, you're not
hurt, boy. There's blood all over you. Well,
where'd all that blood come from? He said, well, I
don't know, but you're not hurt. Back to duty. I
said, well, don't I at least get a purple heart? No.
I don't know what hit me. I think a piece of
plexiglass. A shell went through the windshield,
a piece of plexiglass.
I know in the story you explained it. Explain where
your place in the plane is, I think. No, right up
front, no. Underneath. Well, it's kind of, yeah, I
guess you went underneath to get there, but it was
up front. You could look back and see the pilot.
Okay. You could look down and see you. But, yeah, it
was in the nose. And incidentally, I mentioned in
there, we had to land and take off in the nose in the
most dangerous place of the airplane. Because if
you crashed, whatever she would, we had to because
the pilot, depending on the bombardier for his
eyes, you couldn't see much below you because of
the fog. The bombardier could see a little bit. And
I explained in there how We'd come to an island.
They'd pick out an island with a radar to find it,
and then they'd fly along the coast until a
bombardier spotted some barrels. The Air Force
had put out floating barrels, anchor barrels. And
then the bombardier would call upon John, we're
here, and so he'd make a 270-degree turn and come in
over those barrels. Well, the runway was 50 feet
above the ocean. So he had to raise it 50 feet. And
then you couldn't see the runway until you got
right on it. And the bomber would tell him whether
he was on the runway or not, knew it. And then he
would drop down, and then the pilot couldn't see
the runway. It was scary as hell. How often did you
receive R&R? I never got it. I was offered it one
time, and I turned it down. And don't ask me why. I
think, looking back, I think I was afraid that if I
went for a while or not, I'd be afraid to come back. I
think that was the thinking. But, well, all of
them, I guess, except me, went back. They called me
a dumbass. But some of them went back, and they
cracked up. They couldn't take it.
What did you do to occupy your time when you weren't
flying? Played a lot of poker in the bridge. Drank a
lot of torpedo juice when we could get it. Which is?
Well, torpedo juice is, I mentioned it in there,
it's medical alcohol. The flight surgeon had
strict control of it. He would give the pilot a Coke
bottle full of it. Ron?
Yeah? Excuse me, we're at my dad's while we're
here. Do you want to come in and meet Mr. Hatch? What
do you want? We were talking about your honor, what
you did, Dr., by your time, whenever. Well, drank a
lot of that. Well, we'd take the flight surgeon and
we'd give a Coke bottle full to the pilot. There
were seven men on the crew. Six or seven.
Ten. And the pilot would take it back to the Quonset
head, or the tent, if we were in tents. And he would
cut it in half with water. And then he'd take that,
he'd mix that, and then he'd cut that in half with
grapefruit juice. We had plenty of grapefruit
juice for some reason. Not much else, but
grapefruit juice. And then he was divided up in the
canteen cups among all the crew members. We each
got mugged about a swallow, which he'd get drunk or
held. Well,
how well were the troops supplied as far as
equipment?
Well, another anecdote. He had a buddy who got shot
down. Fortunately, he was rescued. But somehow or
another, for some reason, he wore my hard hat, my
helmet, out there. And he lost it in the drink. He
came back and I said, where's my helmet? He says,
hell, I lost it in the drink. So I went to the supply
officer. I said, hey, I need a helmet. He says, god
damn. He says, why didn't you lose an airplane
helmet? We can supply an airplane like that, but we
can't help it. Okay. So the supply wasn't too good.
You mentioned we were like a living condition on
the different islands. I know you mentioned you
had different conditions. Well, Amchitka wasn't
so good until toward the last. Amchitka was a
burning outpost. And the warlock came and blew our
tents away, blew everything away. like to drown
us. And that's when somebody got wind of it and sent
in some people from the attitude in general. So
plenty of them. Can you imagine that? And they came
in and landed after that one o'clock and looked
into our condition. And they said, hell, this is
terrible. He says, you're going to go back for,
they didn't call it R&R. They called it, I don't
know, rest, I guess. You're going to go back and get
some rest. If we could rest before you come back.
So, all the guys there wanted to go, except me. And I
said, no, I don't think I'll go. I think I'll stay
here and just straighten out. They brought some
onset heads, and I had to help set it up. I didn't
have to, but I did. Because I was afraid. I never did
tell anybody this. So I have to do this, do this. I
was brutally terrified that I would not come back.
I was afraid they'd get me for desertion. Because I
was just, I was exhausted by that time. I'd had too
much combat. In fact, the adjutant told me
finally, he says, you've had too damn much combat.
He says, you realize you've been here longer than
anybody? I said, no way.
Okay. Well, how long were you there from when you
originally were stationed until they finally
sent you home? Let me see. Turn that off for a
minute. I want to send that. Now, that was as
interesting as it was there. Where was my
permission?
That's what I mentioned. I fell over dead in the
air. Sixty-four of the men who had been in class
number 4217, on December 20, 1942. That's when I
got my commission. What was the question? How long
did you serve from when you first were stationed in
the Aleutians to when you finally went home?
Let's see. We departed from there, from Seattle,
on 26th of February, 43, via C-47 headed north. So
that's when I first went to Volusia Island. 26th of
February, 43. I came home.
17th of September, 1943. We're not here the first
day. February. February. March, April, May,
June, July, August, September, seven months. And
about six of those were in the islands.
Okay. Was that an unusually long tour, or was that
a... a fairly rather normal turnover rate?
Well, nobody lasted much more than six months. A
lot of guys went crazy. So that was an average tour,
I would say, six months, seven months. Okay. A lot
of guys, I got an ear infection out there. I don't
know what it was. They called it the Emotion Crud.
And they put me in a hospital in Wichita Falls, an
Air Force hospital. And for some reason, they put
me in psychiatric. No, no, no. And I got into this
snake pit with a bunch of guys. And I asked them,
well, that chicken, emotions, they're all lost to
mine. So I went and told the surgeon. He said, no,
you're not. He said, we'll get you out of there. I
spent a day with him. But they had me under
psychiatric treatment because they didn't know
what this outbreak was in my ears. They thought it
might be psychiatric. Turned out it wasn't. They
called it dilution of crud. Pure, simple cure,
just plain alcohol will chase it away. But it It's
not permanent.
I have to treat them every now and still. It was a
bonus. So they flew you back from the Aleutians to
Wichita Falls to treat them? No, they flew me back
to Seattle. Oh, and this was at the end of your tour?
Yes, at the end of my tour. No, it was a couple years
later that I went to Wichita Falls. Oh, okay. Let me
see. I don't know what I mean.
You know, Colonel Roosevelt was on that plane with
me.
Yes.
And I asked him, I said, Colonel, I said, did he
think that he or I would get bumped in case anyone
got on with their priority? And he said, maybe
we'll find out. In El Paso, Texas, we found out, but
I didn't mind really. I was on my way home, and this
time my parachute was packed safely into the bus
luggage. I didn't mind at all. Now, what happened
was, you know, my parachute, God, that was my life.
It took it everywhere with me. And so whenever we
went on transport, I put it through on the
transport. I had it ready to wear. But when we got to
Seattle and got on the civilian plane, American
Airways, I was carrying my parachute on board and
the steward, they didn't have stewards, the
steward says, I'll hire a lieutenant, you don't
take that with you. And I said, what's he mean by
that? He says, there's no opportunity to use it
here. He says, look at all these civilians. He
says, they don't have parachutes. So I had to...
But there was luggage and that scared
the hell out of me. I didn't have my parachutes. So I
felt good about it when I finally got on that bus and
it was back to where I was. Okay. How effective was
the information coordination between the
branches of the military? Oh, it was terrible.
Terrible. Of course, a lot of it we didn't see. But
the colonel used to say, I wish to God you guys would
quit bitching about the Navy. He says, after all,
they are our allies.
No, that coordination was not good at all. We'd go
out on a raid. Of course, the first thing that went
out was the radio. Every time we'd go on a raid, the
radio would get so full of static. I guess it was
jam, I don't know, 20 or so or less static. But you
couldn't hear much. We just
took the headset off. No, the coordination was not
good at all. I remember one time they were
experimenting with radar up there. They were
going to make a raid on Kisk Island, which had a
volcano on the west end of it. And they were going to
go up through the soil, and with radar, they were
going to spot the target, the Navy had it on their
plane, and they were going to bomb it. And we would
be on the Navy's wing, and when they released their
bombs, we would release ours. Well, God damn, the
Navy flew us right into the volcano. And the lead
ship crashed, blam, into the volcano. We would
have been over it. So... The colonel
says, what the hell were those birds? Could you
explain the fish hook ridge? Well, it was just a
mountainous
group that was shaped like a fish hook in the air,
just like a fish hook. And a lot of fighting went on
there between our ground troops and the Japanese
ground troops. And we were told that the Japs had
taken Fish Hook Ridge. We were told to bomb them out
of there. So we went and bombed it, and meanwhile
our troops took it. But they didn't get their
panels out. No day. So we just blew them to hell, our
own boys. And the leader, the leader was
honky-tonking Anchorage on my way home. A GI came
up to me and he says, Lieutenant, he says, how many
damn machine guns do you have on those B-25s? I
said, well, some of them had five or six and some of
them got two.